---
layout: blog
title: "Amsterdam Lectures in AI and Society"
subtitle: "ALiAS 2025"
author: Willem Zuidema
published: 2025-07-05
image: /assets/posts/2025/melanie-mitchell.jpg
---

## Friday, May 16th, 2025, Lab42, Amsterdam Science Park

ILLC and the CLClab are very happy to announce the 2025 edition of the Amsterdam Lecture in AI and Society, 
with professor Melanie Mitchell from the Santa Fe institute. Melanie Mitchell has been a leading researcher in 
Artificial Intelligence for decades, a great communicator about the technology for a broad audience with books 
("AI: A guide for thinking humans"), columns (In *Science* and *Quanta*) and a widely read newsletter. 
She has been a voice of reason in the heated debates about the abilities and risks of Generative AI in recent years.

## Abstract

**AI’s Challenge of Understanding the World**

I will survey a debate in the artificial intelligence (AI) research community on the extent to which current AI systems can be said to “understand” language and the physical and social situations language encodes. I will describe arguments that have been made for and against such understanding, hypothesize about what humanlike understanding entails, and discuss what methods can be used to fairly evaluate understanding and intelligence in AI systems. 

## Bio:
Melanie Mitchell is Professor at the Santa Fe Institute. Her current research focuses on conceptual abstraction and analogy-making in artificial intelligence systems.  Melanie is the author or editor of six books and numerous scholarly papers in the fields of artificial intelligence, cognitive science, and complex systems. Her 2009 book Complexity: A Guided Tour (Oxford University Press) won the 2010 Phi Beta Kappa Science Book Award, and her 2019 book Artificial Intelligence: A Guide for Thinking Humans (Farrar, Straus, and Giroux) was shortlisted for the 2023 Cosmos Prize for Scientific Writing. 
